Thank you, everybody.
So let's move and
look at the purpose.
The purpose of the
Awakening the Dreamer,
Changing the Dream Symposium,
which is on the screen now,
is bringing forth an
environmentally-sustainable,
spiritually-fulfilling,
socially-just human presence
on this planet.
And now when you look at this
and that we're committed to all
of those, it may at
first seem like these
are three separate issues.
But what I think that
you'll come to understand
is that they are not separate.
They are actually
intricately interwoven.
They're part of a whole.
And what you'll find
is that there's no way
to be able to sustain
any kind of progress
if you only focus on one
and ignore the other two.
So they are very much connected.
And we know that by
the end of the day,
by the end of this symposium,
you'll be even more deeply
aware of that connection.
And I think we understand
that some of you
have been committed in
action in these areas
for a long, long time,
and we acknowledge
that and thank you for that.
And in that context, maybe today
will occur as an opportunity
to deepen your understanding,
explore some new perspectives,
and perhaps expand
and strengthen
your own commitment to what
you're already engaged in.
And so how we are going
to go through these,
the flow of the symposium, is
through a series of questions.
So the first question
is, where are we?
Given that we're bringing forth
an environmentally-sustainable,
spiritually-fulfilling, and
socially-just human presence,
where are we are in relationship
to each of those areas?
And it is very important that
we have some shared knowledge
about that because that
will be a foundation
piece for our work together.
And then the second question
is, how did we get here?
So this is a very,
very important question
because rather than--
generally after we
hear where we are
in any problems,
the natural instinct
is to run to fix it.
But we need to slow
down and figure
out, how did we get here?
So we're going to have a
special kind of analysis
that we'll get to be
involved in to look at,
what is the root cause?
Not just the
superficial behavior,
but what is really
underneath this, so
that we can make other choices?
And then the third question
is, what is emerging now?
What is happening?
What is possible?
Not only what is possible, what
is already emerging through us,
around us, throughout the world?
And then the fourth
and final question
is, where do we go from here?
And probably this question
is the most important
of all because then we're asking
ourselves, what are you to do?
What are you to be?
How do you fit into
what is happening?
And what are the actions
that we need to take
to create the new dream?
Thank you, so let's start
with the first question.
And the first question
is, where are we?
And we'll examine where we are
together at this moment in time
through the three lenses of
the environment, of society,
and our own personal
and spiritual concern.
This is not meant to
be new information.
I think most of us have heard
a lot of this information.
And what too often
happens, though,
if we've heard a lot
of this information,
we can actually
become numb to it.
As you watch this video
about where we are now,
I invite you to let
it all in deeply
and listen with your heart
as well as your mind.
Letting in the scope and impact
of our current global crisis
can be disturbing, and it takes
courage to face the reality
of our present situation.
But it's important
to let yourself feel
and not distance
yourself from it.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
Given that our purpose
is bringing forth
an environmentally-sustainable,
spiritually-fulfilling,
and socially-just
just human presence
on this planet, the
first question to ask
is, where are we?
In other words, what kind of
world is our modern way of life
actually producing?
Answering that question and
confronting the realities
it reveals may not be
comfortable, but as we'll see,
it is an essential
first step to revealing
what may be the
greatest opportunity
any generation has ever faced.
One place to begin is with
the dramatic changes that have
occurred in human population.
For thousands of years,
human population on Earth
remained relatively steady.
Then about 200 years ago, at
the time of the Industrial
Revolution, humans
learned how to harness
the energy of fossil fuels.
That allowed
agricultural productivity
to increase dramatically,
and human population
began to grow exponentially.
Since then, we in
the modern world
have attempted to meet
our needs and wants
through an
ever-expanding process
of extraction, production,
consumption, and disposal
of natural resources.
Gross Domestic Product,
GDP, is supposed
to be a measure of everything.
It puts a value on
everything that's
been produced in an economy
within a year's time.
But what that doesn't
measure is the fact
that in order to achieve
that gross domestic product,
there's also a lot of
destruction of natural wealth.
And one can in fact say that
the greater the GDP of a country
is, measured
conventionally, the more
natural wealth
either in that place
or globally has been destroyed.
This current industrial
model requires
continuous economic growth.
But is that growth sustainable?
According to the United
Nations, sustainability
is the ability of the
current generation
to meet its needs
without compromising
the ability of future
generations to meet theirs.
In many ways, the
mass-consumption dream
of the modern world
has been a nightmare
for the global environment.
The Earth's forests
are shrinking.
Soils are eroding.
Water tables are
falling as a result
of over pumping of aquifers.
Fisheries are collapsing.
Grasslands are
turning into desert
as a result of overgrazing.
No civilization
has ever survived
the ongoing destruction of
its natural support systems,
nor will ours.
In fact, the world is
rapidly approaching a number
of tipping points, thresholds
beyond which dangerous trends
will become irreversible,
threatening the existence
of life as we know it.
One such tipping
point is the end
of cheap, plentiful petroleum,
what is known as peak oil.
The academic researchers,
who are much more likely to be
independent and hard
headed in their analysis
outside the oil
industry, believe
that peak oil probably in
the area of 2010, 2015,
something like that.
And after that, we begin to
see a reduction in the supply,
but an acceleration of demand.
It is impossible to believe
that will not happen.
It is going to happen.
Humanity has been continuously
increasing its resource demand
to the extent that
by the mid '80s,
we've started to use more than
what nature can regenerate.
And by 2007, humanity
used about 30%
more than what nature can renew.
So we have been in
global overshoot.
Overshoot can be thought of as
living off of your credit card.
You know, humanity is living
off its ecological credit card.
If we use more than
nature can keep up with,
we actually start to
erode natural capital
that life depends on.
Currently, if everyone on Earth
lived as North Americans do,
we'd need five Earths.
For everyone to
live as Europeans do
would take three Earths.
In other regions, people are
living beyond the capacity
of one Earth as well.
China and India are
presently living just
under the one-Earth
level, but given
the rapid industrialization
and economic growth
of both countries,
that's sure to change.
We are fast approaching
a number of tipping points
related to the increase
of carbon dioxide
in the Earth's atmosphere
caused primarily
by the burning of fossil fuels.
The scientists around the
world have come together
to tell us that climate
change is actually
happening at a much
faster rate than they
had first anticipated.
The signs of this are
the cataclysmic storms,
the extremes in weather.
The polar ice caps
are melting, and it
means that the entire
ecosystem is in peril.
Tipping point means, in the
context of climate change,
that after a certain temperature
rise and certain other impacts
on the global ecosystem,
certain things change
that cannot be moved back.
If the glaciers
disappear, then they
will no longer be able to
supply the lakes and the rivers.
As they are melting, you have
more water around, flooding,
and lakes are full.
But once they disappear,
then that's it.
Then there is no more.
While people are becoming
increasingly aware
of the effects of
climate change, what's
not as well known is the impact
we are having on other species.
We are in the midst
of a mass extinction,
but the news has not
reached the general public.
They are utterly
unaware that the sacred
and talismanic and
heart-breakingly-loved
companions of ours on this Earth
are about to disappear forever.
They will not return.
African lions are on the
absolute verge of extinction.
There are only 20,000 left.
That's down 90% in
the past few decades.
Every species and subspecies
of tiger on the planet
is on the absolute
verge of extinction.
Elephants down 90% in the past
century, 90% of all large fish
are gone from the oceans.
Half of all species of life
may be extinct in 50 years.
Nothing this destructive has
happened in 65 million years.
Why is that not our
central concern?
It's overwhelming.
No one imagined it could happen.
So suddenly, we're
confronted with this fact,
and we don't really know
how to respond to it.
I think that's beyond most of
us because we haven't deepened
our hearts in a way that would
make possible the grief that
is wanting to be felt.
[END PLAYBACK]
So I invite you
to take a breath.
And very often, we run
from information like this
or start to think
about what we could do,
analyze the situation.
But I invite you right now just
to check in with how you feel
and pay attention to
how you feel confronted
with that information.
Take a moment with that.
Close your eyes if that helps.
And as you come back to
the front of the room,
know that we'll find a way of
turning our emotion about this
into an impulse for action.
We're going to move
on and start to look
at the second of
the three lenses
and ask ourselves the question
of where are we in relation
to the creation of a
socially-just world?
And what is a socially-just
world, anyway?
Maybe a socially-just world
is a world in which everybody
is treated equally,
everybody has a voice,
and perhaps where everybody has
equal access to the resources
that we have in society.
Maybe it's a world in which the
differences of race or class,
age, gender, sexual
orientation, physical ability
no longer separate us.
And to move to a place
beyond that separation,
to move to a place
where we recognize
and even celebrate
our diversity,
perhaps we need to look at the
legacy of hundreds of years
of oppression that still
exists with us today
and also look at and
see how the playing
field is still tilted
in favor of some of us
at the expense of others.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
We've seen the impact that
the dream of the modern world
is having on the environment
and other species.
But how is it affecting
the human family?
One of the primary
expectations people
have of the modern
industrial system
has been that by
growing the economy,
life will get
better for everyone,
that we are continually
moving toward a more
socially-just world.
But is this true?
When I was growing up, I
always thought that, of course,
the world will
become more equal.
There will be more
people educated.
People will get jobs, and, you
know, we'll all be better off.
We'll all be more prosperous.
However, what has that happened
in the last 20 years or so is
the world has
become more unequal.
This idea that the poor will be
kind of helped to come along,
even though the rich
get richer, this hasn't
actually worked out to be true.
We all know that a
great disparity currently
exists between rich and poor.
One way to understand
this disparity
is to think of the Earth as
a community of 100 people.
Although significant progress
has been made in addressing
issues of social justice,
systems of power and privilege
still perpetuate injustice
throughout the world.
Much of humanity
continues to suffer
from the legacy of
centuries of colonialism,
imperialism, and racism.
A socially-just
world is a world
in which if you
had to draw a lot
and it would put you
anywhere in that society,
you would feel
perfectly confident.
You wouldn't be worried because
you knew whatever lot you drew
would be a good lot.
It doesn't mean that
everything is equal.
It just means that every
single person in that society
has a decent shot at living
the fullest life that they can.
But if you close your eyes
and you to think yourself,
you know, there's no more
racism, all this racism stuff,
that's in the past, close yours
eyes and think to yourself,
would you want to be black?
Would you trade places?
Well, if you wouldn't
trade places,
then there's work to be done.
People around the
world are starting
to realize that climate
disruption, pollution,
and other environmental
problems will soon have
an impact on the way they live.
But for millions of
others, it already has.
The movement to address this has
a name, environmental justice.
Environmental
justice is the belief
that no community
should have to bear
the brunt of a disproportionate
amount of environmental burdens
and not enjoy any
environmental benefits.
And around the world, that
is something that you see.
In many parts of the world,
especially once colonized
countries where
local people still
have no control over
their natural resources,
the industrial world's demand
for oil, minerals, and timber
is having devastating
effects on the land, air,
water, and people.
An example is the Niger Delta
of Nigeria, where hundreds
of millions of dollars of
oil have been extracted
and exported, yet
most of the people
live in poverty on
less than $1 a day.
What we do not understand
is that we humans are
only part of this ecosystem.
And when we kill
part of this system,
we are killing ourselves.
I think for a lot of people
who are born in privilege,
there's a sense of
what a friend of mine
calls the right not to know.
I don't have to
know about poverty.
know about racism.
I don't have to know about
environmental degradation
or environmental justice or
injustice because it's not me.
I've got my life, and
I've got my family.
And I can do what I want.
But the world is not forgiving
of that much anymore.
Pollution carries.
Water runs out in
rich places, too.
The forests are coming
down everywhere.
The fish in the
sea are depleting.
It's hurting us all.
Yes, it's hurting
the poor first,
but it's very, very
difficult to go through life
anymore and not see it and
not feel it at some level
personally.
Those of us in the modern world
have had access to more money,
more food, more comfort,
more entertainment,
more travel, and more
communication than any people
who have ever lived.
But has all this
made us happier?
The idea that material gain
leads to personal fulfillment
has been demonstrated
not to be the case.
Although incomes
have skyrocketed
in economically-advanced
countries,
study after study has shown that
levels of reported happiness
have remained the
same or even declined.
There is a great
loneliness of spirit today.
We're trying to cope
in the face of what
seems to be overwhelming
evidence that who we are
doesn't matter.
Meanwhile, we're yearning for
connection with each other,
with ourselves, with the powers
of nature, the possibilities
of being alive.
When that tension
arises, we feel pain,
and then we cover that over
with anything that we can use
to disconnect and to go away.
The reason that people are into
this mass consumption nightmare
dream is because
people are lonely.
And people are hurt,
and people really
believe that more income, more
stuff, more consumption, more
things, the relationship
with things,
will fix the hunger
in the human heart.
And it will never work.
This is not the best
of all possible worlds,
even though it appears that
way on TV and advertisements.
I think people in their most
poignant and honest moments
will admit this is really
hard right now for everybody.
The anguish we feel for what
is happening to our world
is inevitable and
normal and even healthy.
So pain is very useful.
Just don't be afraid
of it because if we
are afraid to feel that, we
won't feel where it comes from.
And where it comes from is
love, our love for this world.
That's what is going
to pull us through.
[END PLAYBACK]
Now, if you would,
please lower or close
your eyes for a moment.
Please notice your breath
going in, going out.
And now just sit
quietly, noticing
how you're feeling right now,
not what you're thinking,
not what needs to be done.
There's time for that later.
For now, see if you
can allow yourself
to just feel in your body your
response to what you've seen.
When you're ready, please take
a breath and open your eyes.
Thank you.
[MUSIC PLAYING